>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, APRIL 9: THE TRUMP
FOREIGN POLICY TEAM CALLS FOR
DEFEATING ISIS AND POLITICAL
CHANGE IN SYRIA.
COLLEGES DEFEND THEIR HIGH
TUITION BY POINTING TO
GRADUATES' EARNINGS, BUT IS THE
DATA RELIABLE?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
IMMIGRATION CRACKDOWN-- SOME
CITIES COOPERATE WITH FEDERAL
AGENTS, WHILE OTHERS DON'T.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION'S
FOREIGN POLICY TEAM IS
ARTICULATING DUAL PRIORITIES FOR
THE UNITED STATES IN SYRIA.
TODAY, SECRETARY OF STATE REX
TILLERSON SAID THE ONGOING FIGHT
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP,
OR ISIS, WHICH IS HEADQUARTERED
IN RAQQA, SYRIA, REMAINS THE
PRIMARY GOAL.
>> OUR PRIORITY IS, FIRST, THE
DEFEAT OF ISIS-- REMOVE THEM
FROM ACCESS TO THE CALIPHATE,
BECAUSE THAT IS WHERE THE THREAT
TO THE HOMELAND AND SO MANY OF
THE HOMELANDS OF OUR COALITION
PARTNERS IS EMANATING FROM.
>> Sreenivasan: TILLERSON ADDED,
IN HIS TRIP TO MOSCOW THIS WEEK,
HE WILL PRESS RUSSIAN LEADERS TO
FULFILL THEIR 2013 PLEDGE TO
FORCE SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR
AL-ASSAD TO SURRENDER HIS
CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
ASSAD'S CHEMICAL ATTACK ON A
REBEL-HELD SYRIAN TOWN PROMPTED
PRESIDENT TRUMP TO ORDER A U.S.
MISSILE COUNTER-STRIKE LAST
WEEK.
MR. TRUMP'S AMBASSADOR TO THE
UNITED NATIONS, NIKKI HALEY,
SAID IN ADDITION TO DEFEATING
ISIS, THE U.S. DOES NOT SEE A
PEACEFUL RESOLUTION IN SYRIA
WHILE AL-ASSAD REMAINS IN POWER.
>> GETTING ASSAD OUT IS NOT THE
ONLY PRIORITY.
SO, WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS,
OBVIOUSLY, DEFEAT ISIS.
SECONDLY, WE DON'T SEE A
PEACEFUL SYRIA WITH ASSAD IN
THERE.
THIRDLY, GET THE IRANIAN
INFLUENCE OUT.
>> Sreenivasan: MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS IN BOTH PARTIES ARE
CALLING ON PRESIDENT TRUMP TO
OBTAIN CONGRESSIONAL
AUTHORIZATION FOR FURTHER
MILITARY ACTION IN SYRIA.
>> I TOOK THE SAME POSITION WITH
RESPECT TO PRESIDENT OBAMA.
WE ARE A NATION WHERE YOU ARE
NOT SUPPOSED TO INITIATE
MILITARY ACTION, START A WAR,
WITHOUT A PLAN THAT IS PRESENTED
TO AND APPROVED BY CONGRESS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN AN APPARENT
SHOW OF FORCE AGAINST NORTH
KOREA, THE PENTAGON HAS ORDERED
A U.S. NAVY STRIKE GROUP IN
PACIFIC OCEAN WATERS TO MOVE
TOWARD THE KOREAN PENINSULA.
THE STRIKE GROUP WAS HEADED FROM
SINGAPORE TO AUSTRALIA, WHEN ITS
ORDERS CHANGED, IN WHAT A NAVY
SPOKESMAN CALLED A "PRUDENT
MEASURE TO MAINTAIN READINESS."
THE GROUP INCLUDES THREE GUIDED
MISSILE CRUISERS AND THE
NUCLEAR-POWERED CARRIER U.S.S.
"CARL VINSON," WHICH HAS MORE
THAN 40 WARPLANES ON BOARD.
ANALYSTS SAY NORTH KOREA MIGHT
MARK THE APRIL 15 BIRTHDAY OF
ITS FOUNDING PRESIDENT WITH
ANOTHER MISSILE LAUNCH OR ITS
SIXTH NUCLEAR WEAPONS TEST.
NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER H.R.
McMASTER WAS ASKED ABOUT THE
MANEUVER IN AN INTERVIEW TODAY
ON "FOX NEWS SUNDAY."
>> WHAT MUST HAPPEN IS THE
DE-NUCLEARIZATION OF THE KOREAN
PENINSULA.
AND SO, THE PRESIDENT HAS ASKED
US TO BE PREPARED, TO GIVE HIM A
FULL RANGE OF OPTIONS, TO REMOVE
THAT THREAT TO THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE AND TO OUR ALLIES AND
PARTNERS IN THE REGION.
>> Sreenivasan: IN EGYPT TODAY,
BOMBS RIPPED THROUGH TWO COPTIC
CHRISTIAN CHURCHES DURING PALM
SUNDAY SERVICES, KILLING AT
LEAST 45 PEOPLE AND INJURING
MORE THAN 100 OTHERS.
EGYPT'S PRESIDENT ABDEL FATTAH
AL-SISI DECLARED A STATE OF
EMERGENCY AND ORDERED THE ARMY
TO HELP POLICE MAINTAIN SECURITY
NATIONWIDE.
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP, ISIS,
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR BOTH
BOMBS, AS IT ESCALATED ATTACKS
AGAINST EGYPT'S CHRISTIAN
MINORITY.
THE FIRST AND DEADLIER BOMBING
WAS IN A CHURCH IN THE NILE
DELTA CITY OF TANTA, ABOUT
60 MILES FROM CAIRO.
LATER, A SUICIDE BOMBER HIT
ALEXANDRIA'S SAINT MARK'S
CATHEDRAL, THE SEAT OF EGYPT'S
COPTIC CHURCH.
POPE FRANCIS, WHO PLANS TO VISIT
EGYPT LATER THIS MONTH,
DENOUNCED THE BOMBINGS AND
EXPRESSED HIS CONDOLENCES.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION IS REVAMPING THE
H-1B VISA PROGRAM FOR HIGHLY
EDUCATED AND SKILLED FOREIGN
WORKERS.
THE APPLICATION PERIOD FOR THE
EMPLOYER-SPONSORED VISAS OPENED
LAST MONDAY, AND BY FRIDAY THE
85,000 SLOTS AVAILABLE WERE
GONE.
THIS MEANS, AS USUAL, THERE WILL
BE A LOTTERY FOR THE H-1B VISAS
LATER THIS YEAR.
JOINING ME FROM MIAMI TO DISCUSS
CHANGES TO THE PROGRAM IS "USA
TODAY" IMMIGRATION REPORTER ALAN
GOMEZ.
THE H-1B VISAS ARE, JUST GIVING
PEOPLE PERSPECTIVE, SOMETHING
THE TECH INDUSTRY HAS WANTED AND
USES FOR A LONG TIME.
>> EXACTLY.
COMPANIES LIKE IBM, MICROSOFT,
GOOGLE HAVE BEEN BRINGING IN
THESE WORKERS FOR A LONG TIME.
WHAT THEY ARGUE IS THAT THERE IS
JUST NOT ENOUGH AMERICAN
WORKERS THAT ARE GRADUATING IN
THE STEM FIELDS, IN SCIENCE,
TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING,
MATHEMATICS, TO FILL ALL THE
JOBS THAT THEY NEED.
AND SO THEY NEED TO BRING IN
THESE WORKERS FROM OVERSEAS WHO
ARE SPECIALLY TRAINED IN THESE
FIELDS TO AUGMENT AND TO BUILD
AND TO CONTINUE INCREASING THEIR
BUSINESSES.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT IT'S BEEN
CONTROVERSIAL EVER SINCE IT WAS
INTRODUCED, THERE HAVE BEEN
PEOPLE COMPLAINING THAT THIS IS
TAKING AWAY AMERICAN JOBS.
>> YES, IT HAS BEEN INCREDIBLY
CONTROVERSIAL.
I MEAN, WE HEAR ALL ABOUT HOW
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS ARE
TAKING LOWER-SKILLED JOBS FROM
AMERICAN WORKERS BUT THAT
ARGUMENT HAS ABSOLUTELY CARRIED
OVER INTO THE HIGH-TECH FIELD.
AND THE ARGUMENT IS THAT A LOT
OF THESE COMPANIES THAT PEOPLE
CLAIM ARE FIRING AMERICAN
WORKERS, AMERICAN COMPUTER
PROGRAMMERS, TECHNICIANS,
SYSTEMS ANALYSTS, I.T. WORKERS,
AND GETTING RID OF THEIR HIGHER
SALARIES AND REPLACING THEM WITH
THESE H-1B WORKERS, WHO CAN COME
IN, IN SOME CASES, AND DO THE
WORK FOR CHEAPER.
IN SOME CASES, FOR EXAMPLE, LAST
YEAR DISNEY WORLD WAS ACCUSED OF
LAYING OFF HUNDREDS OF WORKERS
AND EVEN HAVING THEM TRAIN
THEIR INDIAN REPLACEMENTS TO
TAKE OVER THEIR JOBS.
SO THIS IS SOMETHING THAT HAS
GOTTEN A LOT OF PEOPLE VERY
UPSET AND A LOT OF TRACTION
THROUGHOUT THE REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN LAST YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT WASN'T THE
INTENT OF THE LAW AS IT WAS
DESIGNED, SO HOW DOES THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION PLAN TO FIX IT?
>> THIS IS ONE OF THE AREAS THAT
WE'RE NOT EXACTLY SURE WHERE
PRESIDENT TRUMP SITS.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WITHIN HIS
ADMINISTRATION, FOR EXAMPLE,
ATTORNEY GENERAL JEFF SESSIONS
HAS BEEN RAILING AGAINST THE
H-1B PROGRAM FOR YEARS.
AND SO WE SAW JUST ON MONDAY THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ISSUE A
NOTICE ON THAT FIRST DAY OF THAT
H1-B APPLICATIONS, SAYING
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WAS
GOING TO INCREASE THEIR AUDITS
OF AMERICAN COMPANIES AND
OVERSEAS COMPANIES THAT USE
THESE H-1B VISAS, TO CRACK DOWN
ABUSE AND TO MAKE CLEAR THAT
THEY WEREN'T GOING TO ALLOW JUST
BASICALLY ENTRY-LEVEL COMPUTER
PROGRAMMERS TO COME IN THROUGH
THE H1-B PROGRAM, TO REALLY
FOCUS THE PROGRAM ON WHAT IT WAS
INTENDED TO DO-- THESE VERY HIGH
SKILLED, VERY HARD TO FIND
EXPERTS TO BRING INTO THE UNITED
STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S THE
RIPPLE EFFECT IF THESE AUDITS
TAKE PLACE OR IF THE PROCESS
SLOWS DOWN?
>> WHAT COULD HAPPEN IS YOU'VE
GOT THESE TECH COMPANIES-- IT'S
ALREADY HARD TO GET THESE.
AS YOU MENTIONED, THERE'S, I
THINK, ONE OUT OF EVERY THREE OR
FOUR APPLICATIONS THAT ARE PUT
IN ACTUALLY GET GRANTED.
SO THAT IS ALREADY HARD TO PLAN
FOR SOMETHING THAT YOU HAVE TO
PUT AN APPLICATION IN, IT TAKES
SEVERAL MONTHS FOR IT TO COME
IN, AND THEN, IF THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT STARTS COMING IN AND
AUDITING YOUR REQUEST AND THE
VISAS GRANTED, THAT CREATES MORE
UNCERTAINTY AND AS YOU KNOW VERY
WELL, BUSINESSES NEED STABILITY.
THEY NEED SOME SORT OF
PREDICTABILITY ABOUT WHAT THEIR
WORKFORCE AND FUTURE IS GOING TO
LOOK LIKE, SO THAT'S JUST GOING
TO MAKE IT MORE DIFFICULT FOR
THESE COMPANIES TO OPERATE AND
PLAN FOR EXPANSION, PLAN FOR NEW
PROGRAMS, THINGS LIKE THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
"U.S.A. TODAY" IMMIGRATION
REPORTER ALAN GOMEZ, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT TRUMP
HAS ASKED CONGRESS FOR FUNDS TO
HIRE AN ADDITIONAL 10,000
FEDERAL IMMIGRATION AGENTS.
THAT'S TO HELP INCREASED EFFORTS
TO ARREST AND DEPORT SOME OF
THE ESTIMATED 11 MILLION
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS IN THE
U.S.
THE ADMINISTRATION ALSO PLANS
TO HOLD BACK FEDERAL FUNDS FROM
SO-CALLED "SANCTUARY CITIES,"
THAT LIMIT LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
COOPERATION WITH FEDERAL
IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JOANNE JENNINGS
REPORTS ON HOW THE TRUMP
APPROACH IS PLAYING OUT IN TWO
DIFFERENT PARTS OF CALIFORNIA,
WHERE AN ESTIMATED TWO-AND-A-
HALF TO THREE MILLION
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS LIVE.
>> Reporter: FRESNO COUNTY, IN
THE HEART OF CALIFORNIA'S
CENTRAL VALLEY, IS BEST KNOWN
FOR ITS AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS,
AND THE VAST MAJORITY OF PEOPLE
PICKING THOSE CROPS ARE
IMMIGRANTS FROM MEXICO AND
CENTRAL AMERICA.
MORE THAN HALF OF FRESNO
COUNTY'S ONE MILLION RESIDENTS
ARE LATINO, AND ABOUT 85,000 ARE
ESTIMATED TO BE UNDOCUMENTED.
LIKE THIS WOMAN WE AGREED TO
CALL "GLORIA," A FARM WORKER WHO
CAME TO THE U.S. AS A TEENAGER
20 YEARS AGO.
>> (translated): I LEFT MY
FAMILY BEHIND, MY PARENTS, MY
BROTHERS, IN MEXICO, SO I COULD
COME HERE TO WORK.
I'VE CONTINUED TO WORK AND NEVER
STOPPED.
IT'S HEAVY, HEAVY LABOR.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH THE
WORK IS HARD, GLORIA SAYS SHE
HAS A GOOD LIFE WITH HER THREE
AMERICAN-BORN KIDS.
BUT SHE'S AFRAID SHE MIGHT LOSE
IT ALL.
>> (translated): I FEAR THAT
AT ANY MOMENT I CAN BE SEPARATED
FROM MY CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: GLORIA SAYS MANY
IMMIGRANTS IN FRESNO ARE NERVOUS
ABOUT LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
WORKING WITH FEDERAL AGENTS FROM
IMMIGRATION, CUSTOMS AND
ENFORCEMENT, OR "ICE."
THIS HIGHLY PUBLICIZED ICE
OPERATION IN FEBRUARY, RESULTING
IN 160 ARRESTS IN LOS ANGELES,
EXACERBATED THOSE FEARS.
IT TOOK PLACE LESS THAN TWO
WEEKS AFTER PRESIDENT TRUMP
HAD SIGNED HIS EXECUTIVE ORDER
BROADENING THE TYPES OF
INDIVIDUALS TARGETED FOR
DEPORTATION.
>> IF YOU GET DEPORTED BY ICE,
CHILD PROTECTIVE SERVICES CANNOT
TAKE CUSTODY OF YOUR CHILDREN IF
YOU HAVE SOMEBODY IN CHARGE.
>> Reporter: LAWYERS LIKE AIDA
MACEDO HAVE FANNED OUT ACROSS
THE COUNTY, PROVIDING "KNOW YOUR
RIGHTS" TRAININGS FOR
IMMIGRANTS.
>> I THINK THE COMMUNITY IS
JUST, TO PUT IT SIMPLY, IS
AFRAID TO JUST BE OUTSIDE, TO GO
OUTSIDE.
THEY'RE AFRAID TO BE IN TROUBLE
FOR A BROKEN TAIL LIGHT.
YOU KNOW, THEY'RE AFRAID TO BE
EVEN CLOSE TO A LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT JAIL OR PLACE OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
>> ARMS STRAIGHT DOWN.
>> Reporter: AT THE FRESNO
COUNTY JAIL, ONE OF THE FIRST
QUESTIONS CORRECTIONS OFFICERS
WILL ASK A NEW INMATE IS: "WHERE
WERE YOU BORN?"
FRESNO COUNTY SHERIFF MARGARET
MIMS SAYS IT'S ONE WAY SHE'S
COOPERATING WITH IMMIGRATION AND
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT.
>> SO IF THEY STATE A COUNTRY
OTHER THAN THE UNITED STATES,
THAT'S WHERE ICE WILL TAKE A
LOOK AND DETERMINE THEIR
LEGALITY IN THE COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: ICE TYPICALLY MAKES
"DETAINER REQUESTS"-- ASKING
LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TO HOLD
INMATES SUSPECTED OF IMMIGRATION
VIOLATIONS FOR UP TO TWO DAYS
BEYOND THEIR SCHEDULED RELEASE
DATE.
BUT THAT PRACTICE HAS BEEN
SUCCESSFULLY CHALLENGED IN
COURT.
SO, INSTEAD, MIMS NOW GIVES ICE
AGENTS ACCESS TO THE COUNTY
JAIL'S DATABASE OF BOOKINGS AND
CRIMINAL HISTORIES AND ALLOWS
ICE AGENTS TO INTERVIEW INMATES.
>> AT ONE TIME, ALL SHERIFFS IN
CALIFORNIA RESPECTED THE
DETAINERS AND COMPLIED.
NOW, NO SHERIFFS IN CALIFORNIA
COMPLY WITH THOSE DETAINERS.
SO I HAD A MEETING WITH OUR
LOCAL ICE OFFICE, AND I SAID,
"WELL, LET ME MAKE IT AS EASY AS
POSSIBLE.
YOU COME INTO OUR JAIL, WHERE
YOU CAN DO YOUR WORK, AND IT
WILL PREVENT SOMEBODY VIOLENT OR
A SERIOUS CRIMINAL FROM BEING
RELEASED."
>> Reporter: THE JAIL INFORMS
ALL INMATES OF THE PROCEDURE AT
BOOKING.
>> THIS IS JUST NOTIFYING YOU
THAT ICE WILL BE LOOKING AT
EVERYBODY'S RECORDS THAT COMES
IN HERE, OKAY?
>> ALL RIGHT.
>> Reporter: SINCE FRESNO
STARTED THIS IN 2015, ICE HAS
TAKEN CUSTODY OF MORE THAN 330
INDIVIDUALS RIGHT FROM THE JAIL.
ANGELICA SALCEDO, AN ATTORNEY
FOR THE AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION, SAYS THE PROGRAM VIOLATES
DUE PROCESS RIGHTS.
>> THERE'S A LACK OF
TRANSPARENCY.
THERE'S NO WRITTEN CONTRACT.
THERE'S NO POLICIES OR PRACTICES
THAT ARE ASSOCIATED WITH THAT
PROGRAM, SO THE COMMUNITY HAS NO
WAY TO KEEP THE SHERIFF
ACCOUNTABLE OR KNOW HOW THAT
PROGRAM IS SUPPOSED TO OPERATE,
INCLUDING THE LIMITS OR
RESTRICTIONS THAT ICE MIGHT HAVE
WITHIN HER JAIL.
>> Reporter: SHERIFF MIMS
BELIEVES GIVING ICE ACCESS TO
INMATES REDUCES THE NUMBER OF
FEDERAL IMMIGRATION RAIDS AND
ARRESTS ON THE STREETS OF
FRESNO.
>> IF WE DON'T TAKE PEOPLE INTO
CUSTODY HERE AND ALLOW ICE TO DO
THEIR JOB, THE ONLY OTHER
ALTERNATIVE THAT ICE HAS IS TO
GO OUT INTO THE COMMUNITIES TO
DO THEIR WORK.
THIS IS THE PERFECT PLACE FOR
ICE TO ABLE TO DO THEIR WORK, TO
IDENTIFY THOSE THAT THEY NEED
TO TAKE INTO THEIR CUSTODY AND
TO GET THEM OUT OF THE COUNTRY,
OR AT LEAST INVOLVED IN THE
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: JORGE GALICIA IS
ONE OF THE UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS IN THE FRESNO COUNTY
JAIL WHO ENDED UP IN ICE
CUSTODY.
AFTER A FEBRUARY ARREST, ICE
AGENTS DETERMINED HIS FOUR DRUNK
DRIVING CONVICTIONS MADE HIM
ELIGIBLE FOR DEPORTATION AND
SENT HIM BACK TO MEXICO.
I REACHED HIM IN MEXICO CITY.
>> (translated): WHEN I WAS AT
THE FRESNO JAIL, I DIDN'T KNOW I
WAS GOING TO BE DETAINED BY ICE.
I WAS TALKING TO AN OFFICER WHO
I THOUGHT WAS MY PROBATION
OFFICER.
>> Reporter: GALICIA SAYS HIS
WIFE AND DAUGHTER, BOTH AMERICAN
CITIZENS, ARE STRUGGLING WITHOUT
HIM AND HIS INCOME AS AN IRON
WORKER.
>> (translated): I LOST MY
HEALTH INSURANCE THROUGH WORK,
BECAUSE I STOPPED WORKING WHEN I
WAS LOCKED UP AND DETAINED.
MY WIFE HAS HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE,
AND SHE CAN'T PAY FOR HER
MEDICATION, WHICH IS TOO
EXPENSIVE.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH, THE
FEDERAL BOARD OF IMMIGRATION
DENIED GALICIA'S REQUEST TO
REVERSE HIS DEPORTATION ORDER,
SAYING HIS DRUNK DRIVING WAS
"PUTTING LIVES AND SAFETY OF
OTHERS AT RISK."
200 MILES WEST OF FRESNO, IN SAN
FRANCISCO, LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
HAS A DIFFERENT APPROACH.
IT'S BEEN A SO-CALLED "SANCTUARY
CITY" FOR 30 YEARS, MEANING IT
DOES NOT GET INVOLVED WITH
ENFORCEMENT OF FEDERAL
IMMIGRATION LAWS.
DENNIS HERRERA, SAN FRANCISCO'S
CITY ATTORNEY, SAYS SANCTUARY
POLICIES MAKE ALL OF THE CITY'S
RESIDENTS SAFER.
>> THERE'S BEEN ABSOLUTELY NO
DOUBT THAT IT HAS PROMOTED
COOPERATION BETWEEN IMMIGRANT
COMMUNITIES AND POLICE AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
AND OVER THE COURSE OF THREE
DECADES, WE HAVE SEEN A DRAMATIC
INCREASE IN THE AMOUNT OF PEOPLE
THAT ARE WILLING TO REPORT; THAT
ARE WILLING TO STEP UP AS, TO BE
WITNESSES.
>> Reporter: THAT WAS THE CASE
FOR EVA, WHO ASKED US NOT TO USE
HER FULL NAME.
SHE WAS SEVERELY ABUSED BY HER
EX-HUSBAND, A LEGAL PERMANENT
RESIDENT, WHO WARNED HER NOT TO
GO TO THE POLICE.
>> (translated): HE WOULD TELL
ME THINGS LIKE, "DON'T GO
OUTSIDE BECAUSE THERE'S
IMMIGRATION."
SO I THOUGHT THE REGULAR POLICE
WERE IMMIGRATION POLICE.
>> Reporter: HE WAS CONVICTED
AND SENTENCED TO PROBATION.
EVA LATER OBTAINED LEGAL STATUS
AND WORKS AS AN AFTER-SCHOOL
TEACHER.
>> (translated): I WANT TO
TELL ALL THOSE WOMEN WHO HAVE
BEEN VIOLATED BY THOSE MEN,
"YES, WE CAN CONTINUE TO STAND
UP FOR OURSELVES," BECAUSE THIS
WILL ALWAYS BE A SANCTUARY CITY.
>> Reporter: DURING HIS
CAMPAIGN, PRESIDENT TRUMP RAILED
AGAINST SANCTUARY CITIES AND
CALLED ATTENTION TO A 2015
SHOOTING DEATH IN SAN FRANCISCO.
>> ANOTHER VICTIM IS KATE
STEINLE.
GUNNED DOWN IN THE SANCTUARY
CITY OF SAN FRANCISCO, BY AN
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT, DEPORTED FIVE
PREVIOUS TIMES.
AND THEY KNEW HE WAS NO GOOD.
>> Reporter: STEINLE'S ALLEGED
KILLER, JUAN FRANCISCO LOPEZ
SANCHEZ, HAD BEEN RELEASED FROM
JAIL DAYS BEFORE THE SHOOTING,
BECAUSE SAN FRANCISCO, AS A
SANCTUARY CITY, HAD DECLINED TO
HONOR A DETAINER REQUEST FROM
ICE.
>> Reporter: CITY ATTORNEY
DENNIS HERRERA SAYS IF ICE HAD
BEEN SERIOUS ABOUT APPREHENDING
LOPEZ SANCHEZ, IT COULD HAVE
TRIED TO OBTAIN AN ARREST
WARRANT FROM A JUDGE.
>> THEY COULD HAVE ASKED FOR,
COME TO US WITH THE COURT ORDER
SAY THEY WERE INTERESTED AND
FOLLOW THE PROCESSES THAT WOULD
HAVE ALLOWED HIM TO BE TURNED
OVER.
AND THEY DIDN'T.
>> Reporter: ICE DECLINED
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S REQUESTS FOR
AN INTERVIEW, BUT IN A WRITTEN
STATEMENT, A SPOKESPERSON SAID,
IN PART: "ICE WILL NO LONGER
EXEMPT CLASSES OR CATEGORIES OF
REMOVABLE ALIENS FROM POTENTIAL
ENFORCEMENT.
ALL OF THOSE IN VIOLATION OF THE
IMMIGRATION LAWS MAY BE SUBJECT
TO IMMIGRATION ARREST, DETENTION
AND, IF FOUND REMOVABLE BY FINAL
ORDER, REMOVAL FROM THE UNITED
STATES."
>> WHEN CITIES AND STATES REFUSE
TO HELP ENFORCE IMMIGRATION
LAWS, OUR NATION IS LESS SAFE.
>> Reporter: JUST TWO WEEKS AGO,
ATTORNEY GENERAL JEFF SESSIONS
ANNOUNCED THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
WOULD START TO WITHHOLD FUNDS
FROM SANCTUARY CITIES THAT DON'T
COOPERATE WITH ICE.
HERRERA HAS FILED A LAWSUIT TO
BLOCK THAT.
>> SOMEWHERE BETWEEN $1.2
AND $2 BILLION OF OUR NEARLY
$10 BILLION BUDGET COMES FROM
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
THIS IS VITALLY IMPORTANT TO THE
INTEREST OF SAN FRANCISCO AS A
CITY, TO RESIDENTS OF OUR CITY
WHETHER THEY ARE IMMIGRANT OR
NON-IMMIGRANT.
>> Reporter: NOW, THE DEMOCRATS
WHO CONTROL THE STATE
LEGISLATURE IN SACRAMENTO HAVE
UPPED THE ANTE.
A BILL CALLED SB-54, WHICH
PASSED THE CALIFORNIA SENATE
LAST WEEK, WOULD ESSENTIALLY
CREATE A SANCTUARY STATE.
IT WOULD BAR LAW ENFORCEMENT
FROM HELPING FEDERAL IMMIGRATION
OFFICIALS.
CALIFORNIA STATE SENATE LEADER
KEVIN DE LEON IS THE BILL'S
SPONSOR.
HE'S ALSO THE SON OF A SINGLE
MOTHER WHO WAS ONCE AN
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANT.
>> IT WAS A VERY SIMPLE MEASURE,
TO MAKE SURE THAT OUR LOCAL TAX
DOLLARS ARE NOT UTILIZED TO BE A
COG IN THE TRUMP DEPORTATION
MACHINE.
WE'RE COGNIZANT THAT THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT HAS ALL THE AUTHORITY
TO ENFORCE IMMIGRATION LAW, BUT
WE WANT TO MAKE IT VERY CLEAR
THAT WE WON'T LIFT A SINGLE
FINGER OR SPEND A SINGLE CENT TO
SEPARATE CHILDREN FROM THEIR
MOTHERS OR MOTHERS FROM THEIR
CHILDREN.
>> THOSE FELONS ARE BAD GUYS.
THEY SHOULD NOT EVER BECOME U.S.
CITIZENS.
THEY DESERVE TO BE DEPORTED.
>> Reporter: REPUBLICAN STATE
SENATOR JOEL ANDERSON STRONGLY
OPPOSES THE BILL, SAYING IT WILL
PROTECT UNDOCUMENTED FELONS.
>> I THINK THAT THIS BILL IS A
DEPARTURE FROM WHAT CALIFORNIA
HAS DONE UP TO NOW, WITH THE
FELONS FIRST.
WE HAVE IN THE PAST ALLOWED ICE
TO GO INTO OUR JAILS, IDENTIFY
THOSE FELONS WHO ARE DEPORTABLE,
AND WE HAVE ALLOWED THEM TO
DEPORT THEM.
>> Reporter: THE CALIFORNIA
STATE SHERIFFS' ASSOCIATION IS
ALSO FIGHTING THE BILL.
>> IT WOULD PROHIBIT ME FROM
WORKING WITH ICE IN THE JAIL.
AND TO SAY WE CAN'T COMMUNICATE
WITH ANOTHER FEDERAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, IT DOESN'T
MAKE SENSE.
IN FACT, IT WOULD MAKE OUR
COMMUNITIES MUCH LESS SAFE.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE HOW A GROUP
OF VOLUNTEERS IN ARIZONA PAYS
TRIBUTE TO MIGRANTS WHO DIED
WHILE CROSSING THE U.S.-MEXICO
BORDER, ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: IF YOU ADD UP
ALL THE COLLEGE STUDENT LOAN
DEBT IN THE UNITED STATES, IT
STANDS AT $1.4 TRILLION-- WITH A
"T."
THAT'S MORE THAN AMERICANS OWE
ON THEIR CREDITS CARDS OR CAR
LOANS AND JUST ABOUT ANYTHING
ELSE EXCEPT THEIR HOMES.
THIS MONTH, AS STUDENTS BEGIN
DECIDING WHICH UNIVERSITIES
THEY'LL ATTEND IN THE FALL,
FAMILIES INCREASINGLY WANT MORE
PROOF THAT THE HIGH COSTS OF A
COLLEGE DEGREE ARE WORTH IT.
BEYOND GRADUATION RATES, THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR DATA ON JOB
PLACEMENT RATES AND SALARIES,
BUT GETTING THAT INFORMATION
RELIABLY IS NOT EASY.
"WALL STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER
MELISSA KORN KNOWS ABOUT THAT,
AS SHE RESEARCHED FOR HER STORY.
SHE JOINS ME NOW IN THE STUDIO.
SO, WHAT'S SO DIFFICULT ABOUT
FINDING AN APPLES TO APPLES
COMPARISON OF HOW STUDENTS DO
WHEN THEY GRADUATE COLLEGE?
>> NOBODY HAS THE SAME APPLES.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT LOOKS AT
GRADUATION RATES.
THEY LOOK AT STUDENTS WHO ARE
ENROLLED FOR THE FIRST TIME ON A
FULL-TIME BASIS.
SO MEANING, THEY DIDN'T TRANSFER
SOMEWHERE.
THEY DIDN'T STOP IN, STOP OUT.
AND THEY ARE NOT GOING PART-
TIME.
AND THAT LEAVES OUT A HUGE SWATH
OF STUDENTS, OF TODAY'S COLLEGE
STUDENTS, MANY OF WHOM ARE
ADULTS ATTENDING SCHOOL PART-
TIME OR STARTED SCHOOL, LEFT,
GO BACK TO ANOTHER SCHOOL.
SO EVEN THE MOST BASIC
GRADUATION RATE ISN'T A VERY
CLEAR NUMBER.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WE FORGET IS THE
SORT OF HOLLYWOOD NOTION OF A
FOUR-YEAR, RESIDENTIAL
EXPERIENCE IS NOT THE NORM OF
HOW MOST PEOPLE GET THEIR
EDUCATION AFTER HIGH SCHOOL.
>> RIGHT, SO ABOUT 40% OF
COLLEGE STUDENTS NOW ATTEND
PART-TIME.
THAT'S A HUGE SHIFT OVER THE
PAST FEW DECADES.
YOU HAVE PEOPLE WHO GO TO
COMMUTER SCHOOLS, THEY GO TO
SCHOOL AT NIGHT, THEY GO TO
SCHOOL ONLINE.
THEY DON'T LIVE IN IVY COVERED
DORMS-- IT'S JUST NOT THE WAY
COLLEGE IS NOW, FOR MOST PEOPLE.
THE NONTRADITIONAL STUDENTS ARE
NOW THE TRADITIONAL STUDENT.
GETTING DATA ON THEM, GETTING
REALLY USEFUL DATA ON HOW THEY
FARE AT COLLEGE AND HOW THEY
FARE AFTERWARDS IS REALLY HARD.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THAT
COMPARISON?
A LOT OF PARENTS ARE THINKING
ABOUT, IS THE STUDENT GOING TO
GET A JOB OR ARE THEY GOING TO
MOVE BACK INTO MY BASEMENT.
>> I KNOW PARENTS DON'T
NECESSARILY WANT THEIR KIDS
MOVING BACK INTO THEIR BASEMENT.
SO IT REALLY DEPENDS ON WHAT THE
STUDENT IS GOING TO BE STUDYING,
AND IN THE BROADER ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS AT THE TIME OF THEIR
GRADUATION.
SO IT'S NOT VERY HELPFUL FOR A
SCHOOL TO SAY, 80% OF OUR
GRADUATES ARE EMPLOYED WITHIN
SIX MONTHS OF GRADUATION.
BECAUSE THAT'S OFTEN
SELF-REPORTED DATA, FROM THE
GRADUATES.
SIX MONTHS AFTER GRADUATION
DOESN'T SAY MUCH ABOUT WHERE
THEY'LL BE FIVE OR TEN YEARS
AFTER GRADUATION.
IT'S ALSO AN AVERAGE.
SO MAYBE ALL THE ENGINEERS ARE
EMPLOYED, BUT NONE OF THE FILM
MAJORS ARE.
SO YOU REALLY HAVE TO BE
DRILLING DOWN, DEPARTMENT BY
DEPARTMENT, MAJOR BY MAJOR AND
YOU CAN'T JUST RELY ON THE
SCHOOLS FOR THIS INFORMATION
BECAUSE THEY DON'T HAVE IT
THEMSELVES.
THEY DON'T DO A GREAT JOB
TRACKING THEIR GRADUATES.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THEY DON'T
REALLY HAVE AN INCENTIVE TO DO
SO-- I MEAN, IF ANYTHING, IT
EXPOSES THEIR COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGE OR DISADVANTAGE
AGAINST OTHER SCHOOLS.
>> RIGHT, SO THEY HAVE AN
INCENTIVE TO HIGHLIGHT THE
REALLY GREAT SUCCESS STORIES.
AND WHEN THEY HAVE GOOD NUMBERS
THEY WILL BOAST ABOUT THOSE.
BUT OFTENTIMES WHEN YOU HAVE
STUDENT OUTCOME SURVEYS THAT
THEY CONDUCT THEMSELVES, THEY
HAVE RESPONSE RATES OF 15%, 20%,
25%.
SO IT'S NOT REALLY TELLING YOU
WHAT IS HAPPENING WITH THE
GRADUATING CLASS.
AND YEAH, IF THEY HAVE A LOT OF
STUDENTS OR GRADUATES GOING INTO
TEACHING OR SOCIAL WORK, WHICH
ARE INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT AREAS
FOR GRADUATES TO GO INTO, THEY
DON'T PAY VERY WELL.
SO THEIR EARNINGS NUMBERS MIGHT
NOT LOOK SO GOOD.
THEY MIGHT KEEP THAT QUIET.
>> Sreenivasan: MELISSA KORN
FROM "THE WALL STREET JOURNAL,"
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN A SHOW OF
UNITY TODAY IN SWEDEN, THOUSANDS
OF SWEDES GATHERED NEAR THE SITE
WHERE A MAN RAMMED A HIJACKED
TRUCK INTO STOCKHOLM PEDESTRIANS
AND SHOPPERS ON FRIDAY, KILLING
AT LEAST FOUR PEOPLE AND
INJURING 15.
POLICE NOW SAY THE 39-YEAR-OLD
SUSPECT IN CUSTODY IS AN ISIS
SYMPATHIZER FROM UZBEKISTAN, WHO
WAS DENIED ASYLUM BUT ELUDED
AGENTS TRYING TO DEPORT HIM.
SWEDISH POLICE ALSO SAY THEY
ARRESTED A SECOND PERSON IN
CONNECTION WITH THE ATTACK, AND
AT LEAST FOUR OTHERS ARE BEING
HELD FOR QUESTIONING.
IN NEIGHBORING NORWAY, POLICE
SAFELY DETONATED A "BOMB-LIKE
DEVICE" THEY FOUND NEAR A BUSY
OSLO SUBWAY STATION LAST NIGHT,
AND TOOK ONE SUSPECT INTO
CUSTODY, A 17-YEAR-OLD RUSSIAN
ASYLUM-SEEKER.
THE U.S. MILITARY SAYS A SPECIAL
FORCES SOLDIER HAS BEEN KILLED
IN COMBAT AGAINST ISIS MILITANTS
IN AFGHANISTAN.
THE SOLDIER WAS KILLED YESTERDAY
DURING OPERATIONS IN EASTERN
AFGHANISTAN'S NANGARHAR
PROVINCE, AN ISIS STRONGHOLD.
ISIS HAS BEEN INCREASING ITS
PRESENCE THERE, WHERE IT IS
BATTLING BOTH AFGHAN GOVERNMENT
FORCES AND THE MORE POWERFUL
TALIBAN.
OFFICIALS SAID INSURGENTS KILLED
AT LEAST 13 AFGHAN SECURITY
FORCES IN ATTACKS TODAY.
A BRUSH FIRE THAT'S BEEN BURNING
FOR SEVERAL DAYS IN SOUTH
FLORIDA IS 85% CONTAINED.
HIGH WINDS AND DRY CONDITIONS
CAUSED THE FIRE IN BROWARD
COUNTY TO GROW TO MORE THAN
6,500 ACRES.
A SMALLER, NEARLY 200-ACRE BRUSH
FIRE OUTSIDE ORLANDO FORCED
RESIDENTS FROM THEIR HOMES AND
PARTIALLY DAMAGED A GIRL SCOUT
CAMP.
IN COASTAL HERNANDO COUNTY,
NORTH OF TAMPA, FIREFIGHTERS ARE
BATTLING A BRUSH FIRE THAT'S
GROWN TO 300 ACRES.
IT IS 20% CONTAINED.
THE IMPEACHMENT PROCEEDINGS
BEGIN TOMORROW AGAINST ALABAMA
GOVERNOR ROBERT BENTLEY.
HE'S ACCUSED OF MISUSING STATE
RESOURCES TO COVER UP AN AFFAIR
WITH A FORMER AIDE.
ALABAMA'S SUPREME COURT RULED
UNANIMOUSLY YESTERDAY THAT
IMPEACHMENT PROCEEDINGS IN THE
STATE LEGISLATURE CAN MOVE
FORWARD AGAINST THE TWO-TERM
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR.
BENTLEY DENIES DOING ANYTHING
ILLEGAL, AND SAYS HE WILL NOT
RESIGN.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, JUDGE
NEIL GORSUCH OFFICIALLY JOINS
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT TOMORROW.
HE'LL BE SWORN IN BY PRESIDENT
TRUMP IN A PUBLIC CEREMONY AT
THE WHITE HOUSE, AND EARLIER BY
CHIEF JUSTICE JOHN ROBERTS AT
THE COURT.
THE SENATE CONFIRMED THE
NOMINATION FRIDAY IN A 54 TO 45
VOTE, WITH ONLY THREE DEMOCRATS
JOINING THE REPUBLICAN MAJORITY.
THIS AFTER A CONTROVERSIAL RULE
CHANGE IN THE SENATE'S PROCESS
FOR CONFIRMING SUPREME COURT
NOMINEES.
THE 49-YEAR-OLD GORSUCH WILL
BECOME THE 113th JUSTICE OF THE
SUPREME COURT, AN APPOINTMENT
FOR LIFE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.